[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: People
[Amit Varma]: who talk about the great potential India has and how we are becoming a younger country
[Amit Varma]: and we have this demographic dividend and so on, miss one important and depressing point.
[Amit Varma]: As a society, we actually suppress the potential of half our population. Women in this country
[Amit Varma]: are treated as second class citizens. They are not empowered in their childhood and are
[Amit Varma]: often educated less or worse than their brothers. They are forced to conform to roles that destroy
[Amit Varma]: their potential. In fact, they're looked upon more as property than as people. And when
[Amit Varma]: women speak up about this, they face an amazing amount of anger from men. Anger. Where is
[Amit Varma]: this anger coming from?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. When I first asked the remarkable other team, it's
[Amit Varma]: good to join me on this episode. I told her the subject would be misogyny in entertainment
[Amit Varma]: and Indian society. Aditi said she wanted a different title. She suggested claiming
[Amit Varma]: our space. My subject was a lament, but hers was also a call to action and couldn't have
[Amit Varma]: been more appropriate. While we were chatting about it at the IBM podcast studio, one of
[Amit Varma]: the producers, Swati Bakshi, also got involved and shared some of her insights. So we improvised
[Amit Varma]: and asked her to also be a guest on the show. Swati is a former journalist who now works
[Amit Varma]: as a producer at IBM and will be taking over producing the show from Abbas Momen, whom
[Amit Varma]: you heard in the last episode, who is leaving the scene and the unseen to take over as producer
[Amit Varma]: of Cyrus Broach's fantastic show, Cyrus Says. I tried to convince Abbas to stay, but he
[Amit Varma]: simply doesn't agree that I'm funnier than Cyrus. Go figure. Anyway, I had an enlightening
[Amit Varma]: conversation with Aditi and Swati. But before we get to that, let's take a commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to, well, you need to listen to some
[Amit Varma]: more. Check out the ones from IBM podcast who co produced the show with me. Go to IBM
[Amit Varma]: podcast.com or download the IBM app and you'll find a host of great Indian podcasts that
[Amit Varma]: cover every subject you could think of. From the magazine I edit, Pragati at ThinkPragati.com,
[Amit Varma]: there is the Pragati podcast hosted by Hamsini Hariharan and Pawan Srinath. There is a brilliant
[Amit Varma]: Hindi podcast, Puliyabazi, hosted by Pranay Koteswamy and Sourabh Chandra. And apart from
[Amit Varma]: these policy podcasts, IBM has shows that cover music, films, finance, sports, sci-fi,
[Amit Varma]: tech and the LGBT community all under one roof, or rather all in one app. So download
[Amit Varma]: the IBM podcast app today.
[Amit Varma]: Aditi and Swati, welcome to the show.
[Unknown]: Thank you, Amit. Hi, Amit. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Aditi, in the last show that we did last week, where you spoke about the beginning of your
[Amit Varma]: journey as a stand up comedian, you said something which sort of a light bulb went off in my
[Amit Varma]: head. I mean, it shouldn't be a revelation. And I'm sure it's something that people like
[Amit Varma]: you take for granted. But you spoke about how part of the reason you came on your own
[Amit Varma]: as a comedian as someone who would stand and tell jokes was because you were in the girls
[Amit Varma]: college after a girl school, you went to St. Mary's in Pune and then to Sophia's in Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: And because there were girls all around you, you were actually able to get the confidence
[Amit Varma]: and were given the space to stand up and speak for yourself and build an audience. And your
[Amit Varma]: point was that if it was a coed environment, the boys would never have let that happen,
[Amit Varma]: because they want to be in charge of everything. And at that point, it struck me that there
[Amit Varma]: is no male comedian anywhere who would say that I got the chance to claim my space, because
[Amit Varma]: I was in an all boys school, because if I was in a coed environment, the girls wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: have let me. No male will ever say that, which kind of, you know, brings us to what I want
[Amit Varma]: to start this episode with is that when we speak about the role of men and women in society
[Amit Varma]: and how it is reflected in attitudes, we are starting at a very unequal spot, where women
[Amit Varma]: have to face a whole bunch of structural obstacles, which men are completely unaware of, like
[Amit Varma]: I was unaware that they could be such a thing till you mentioned it in the last episode
[Amit Varma]: when it's like, okay, another bulb goes off in your head. So I and you know, when I invited
[Amit Varma]: you to do this specific episode, and we spoke about it, the way I framed it was let's talk
[Amit Varma]: about misogyny and entertainment. And you said no, let's call it claiming your space,
[Amit Varma]: because that's a more positive way. And it's also broader. And, you know, we brought Swati
[Amit Varma]: into the show, because she had a whole bunch of thoughts on that from her experience. So
[Amit Varma]: let's talk about claiming your space. What has the journey been like?
[Guest 1]: A G and you know, that line you said was so true is that we're starting from a grossly
[Guest 1]: unequal. I mean, the finishing the starting line is completely different when it comes
[Guest 1]: to the different genders. And I sort of I remember being in an all girls school and
[Guest 1]: I think I do this joke in my show right now, which is that in my family, we don't beat
[Guest 1]: girls because they bruise easily. It's much easier to beat a little boy and be like, oh,
[Guest 1]: he fell down from a cycle. That's why he has triangulation marks on his neck. And that
[Guest 1]: always gets a huge laugh and a huge applause. But it also simply points out the fact that
[Guest 1]: the treatment of girls and boys is unequal and is harmful for both girls and boys. I
[Guest 1]: mean, girls, whether it's just being given a chance to be born, really is a is a sort
[Guest 1]: of mathematical. So I think you're sort of you're playing Russian roulette from the womb.
[Guest 1]: If you happen to be any other gender than male, and we cannot deny that whatever narrative
[Guest 1]: that is currently running the world is male has been defined by heterosexual, to a very
[Guest 1]: large extent, white men. Every other story then or every other voice that speaks up is
[Guest 1]: then trying very hard to have themselves heard in a room that's already full of cacophony
[Guest 1]: of one story that is trying to keep every other story down. So from the point of just
[Guest 1]: being born to the point of having access to I mean, I keep thinking about I used to have
[Guest 1]: this cousin who was really into cricket. And I remember because we were told no, no, no,
[Guest 1]: only girls only play badminton, and boys will play cricket. And she I mean, unfortunately
[Guest 1]: for her got breasts at the age of 12. And that was it. That was the end. No more cricket.
[Guest 1]: No more cricket. No, Mithali Raj. I remember and this is an awkward, embarrassing thing
[Guest 1]: to bring up literally within the first three minutes of this podcast. But I remember when
[Guest 1]: I got my period, I hid it from my family for four months. And that included coming up with
[Guest 1]: such weird devices to stop anyone from knowing because I knew that the moment I told them
[Guest 1]: that I had my period, it would immediately be now sit with your legs closed. Don't talk
[Guest 1]: loudly. Don't talk to boys. You can't be you know, doing all these things. I was terrified
[Guest 1]: of the fact that my femaleness had suddenly asserted itself completely out of my control.
[Amit Varma]: That's almost incredible awareness for 11 or 12 year old or whatever it was.
[Guest 1]: Gee, I'd seen it just happen with I'd just seen it happen with so many of my classmates
[Guest 1]: who would suddenly become demure, you know, during sports period, who would, you know,
[Guest 1]: be sort of like, constantly be like, shoved aside and hushed aside. I just I was like,
[Guest 1]: I can't let my childhood end. And I sort of, I mean, finally, I sort of came to terms with
[Guest 1]: it four months later when it got found out. It's not even that I told anybody it got found
[Guest 1]: out. And that was another hugely humiliating experience. Even though I come from a very
[Guest 1]: liberal family, where you know, the other kind would be like better chocolate low now
[Guest 1]: you're a woman. But what chocolate I wanted to run around I wanted to talk to boys I want
[Guest 1]: to laugh loudly with my mouth open. I wanted to do those things. And I just knew at that
[Guest 1]: age, that I was walking into a disadvantage. And I think that has sort of colored my perceptions
[Guest 1]: of everything that I have done as an adult and as a woman.
[Amit Varma]: And Swati I often say, you know, when I write about economics, I say from the economics
[Amit Varma]: perspective that India really inhabits three centuries at the same time, the 19th, the
[Amit Varma]: 20th and the 21st. And that's equally true of social attitudes that we inhabit those
[Amit Varma]: three centuries at the same time. And the journey for you in one sense has been starker
[Amit Varma]: for you know, those of us who are from Bombay or Delhi or whatever, because you actually
[Amit Varma]: come from Lucknow, and you've kind of made that journey from there. What has it been
[Guest 2]: like?
[Guest 2]: It's quite a journey. And being in Lucknow was a entirely different experience, I would
[Guest 2]: say that Lucknow University is still I think, like you said, is 18th century, I would not
[Guest 2]: even say 19th. I mean, the way men behave with women there. And if you go to the university
[Guest 2]: without wearing a suit or a dupatta, I mean, it's a scandal. And the way men look at you,
[Guest 2]: they hound you, make comments on you, it's very, very normalized, it's quite normalized.
[Guest 2]: And it is seen as a...
[Guest 2]: So the level that it has been normalized is a problem. And it's not, it doesn't stop there.
[Guest 2]: It seeps into every aspect of your life and everything that you do. So despite being highly
[Guest 2]: educated and you know, working in one of the best organizations in the world, my experience
[Guest 2]: has always been something that I would, you know, remember as an experience filled with
[Guest 2]: discrimination on various levels and various different forms.
[Amit Varma]: And just to set the context, what period are we talking about when you were in college
[Guest 2]: in Lucknow?
[Guest 2]: It's still 2003.
[Amit Varma]: Till 2003. And at what point does it sort of strike you that this is something that
[Amit Varma]: is not normal but normalized?
[Guest 2]: Because even at your home, you are told to present yourself in a particular way because
[Guest 2]: you're a girl and you're grown up. I was, I mean, I became comfortable with my own body
[Guest 2]: after I would say, you know, doing my post graduation in Delhi. Until then, it was a
[Guest 2]: very turbulent phase because when I landed in Delhi from Lucknow, it was a completely
[Guest 2]: different structure of, I would say, the structure of living, commuting, studying, everything
[Guest 2]: was quite different from Lucknow. And it took a toll on my performance also, I remember.
[Guest 2]: And that's like a blot on my resume till now. Until then, I was like a distinction holder.
[Guest 2]: And then suddenly in DU, my percentage went down to 56%. It was like shattered.
[Guest 2]: What was different?
[Guest 2]: It was a cultural, I don't know, a cultural adjustment coming from a small town in India
[Guest 2]: to a bigger town and then being a girl on your own. The kind of pace Delhi offered me,
[Guest 2]: I was not prepared for that. And the kind of people around, I was not prepared for that.
[Guest 2]: And it took me a lot of time to, you know, sync with the pace of the city. And that was
[Guest 2]: obviously something that I had to understand. And then two years time was something that
[Guest 2]: I took to understand that, to be in sync with myself and the city. So the city in itself
[Guest 2]: is something, a big phenomena that decides how a woman would be. I don't know in other
[Guest 2]: countries also, I think it's the same. But in India, it's very much a big factor that
[Guest 2]: decides how you're going to move, till what time you're going to move, what subjects are
[Guest 2]: you going to study if you're studying in a university. Because, you know, I remember
[Guest 2]: in Lucknow University, the sociology department was notorious. And there were very few women
[Guest 2]: opting for sociology because of that. One being myself, because my sister, elder sister
[Guest 2]: who was studying in that department, she told me categorically not to take sociology because
[Guest 2]: that department is notorious. So you imagine that how women do not, you know, make their
[Guest 2]: choices, their choices are already being made.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my question for you. That fine, Lucknow and Delhi when you move there were
[Amit Varma]: like 18th century or 19th century India or whatever. And these attitudes were there and
[Amit Varma]: you just had to kind of adjust. But then you went on after that to work for the BBC, for
[Amit Varma]: example. Was that 21st century India?
[Guest 2]: It is. It is because BBC gave me a perspective. I was not that open minded, I would say to
[Guest 2]: discuss certain things that the profession of journalism and the organisation gave me
[Guest 2]: to think about. And the newsroom was a space where we used to discuss each and everything.
[Guest 2]: And it's a good space to do that. Because there is no filters that we have to apply
[Guest 2]: when we're discussing in meetings and all those things. But, you know, it took a lot
[Guest 2]: of time for me there also to be comfortable talking about it. Like Aditi now can talk
[Guest 2]: about her periods and I now can, but a few years down the line, I could not actually.
[Guest 2]: So the organisation actually was something that offered me that space where I could open
[Guest 2]: up and explore.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say it is true of journalism or are there still those misogynistic attitudes
[Amit Varma]: creeping into journalism itself?
[Guest 2]: I would say true of journalism as a profession, definitely, because, you know, you are given
[Guest 2]: certain assignments like reporting assignments where you are challenged by the space that
[Guest 2]: you are accessing. And you have to understand that how you're going to do keeping yourself
[Guest 2]: safe at the same time delivering what is required of you. So I would say journalism definitely
[Guest 2]: made me a stronger person who is not only a woman, but a person.
[Amit Varma]: A stronger person by empowering you or challenging you?
[Guest 2]: Challenging me. Empowerment comes very late, you know, in Delhi, of course, when after
[Guest 2]: 2012 also, when all these steps were taken that people would be dropped off, women would
[Guest 2]: be dropped off with guards and all those things, that things, you think that a city can be
[Guest 2]: secured like that, it's not possible at all, you cannot do that. So empowerment is something
[Guest 2]: that I think our country needs to needs to think about, but challenging, of course, because
[Guest 2]: if you are challenged, then you think about your own security, and then you devise ways
[Guest 2]: of doing it. That is, again, is limiting your choices, because you don't have many choices
[Guest 2]: to you know, to function and to make yourself secured at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: And Mumbai, of course, is a world apart from Delhi. So you started doing, for example,
[Amit Varma]: open mics and stand up comedy in 2010. And on that, was it harder for you to be accepted?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, because the truth is also that we are taught we are inconveniences, our bodies are
[Guest 1]: inconveniences, the space that we try to occupy is an inconvenience. Every time we speak up,
[Guest 1]: it is an inconvenience. We are collateral damage to the narrative of the great man story.
[Guest 1]: And we are side characters in our own story. And so I think that sense of like worthlessness,
[Guest 1]: that's why it attaches itself to your psyche. That's why it attaches itself to our bodies.
[Guest 1]: That's why I mean, marketers and advertisers can prey on our insecurities left, right and
[Guest 1]: center. I personally do not remember looking at my own body because I was terrified. I
[Guest 1]: was like, I don't know what is happening to my body as I grew up. Because I was like,
[Guest 1]: I know that this is a problem. I know that this is going to like, restrict my space,
[Guest 1]: this is going to make me invisible.
[Guest 1]: And so it's going to make you invisible because people will see the body, not the person will
[Guest 1]: see the body and not the person will not hear the words and that has not stopped. That has
[Guest 1]: not stopped. I mean, I still am constantly getting you know, trash about what I wear
[Guest 1]: on stage. You know, even the way I'm sure no male comedian ever does. No, no, no. You
[Guest 1]: know, the kind of comments that that you see below my YouTube videos, which I've stopped
[Guest 1]: looking at. But if you see the kind of comments below my YouTube videos, they will have a
[Guest 1]: distinct color that I don't think any male comedian sees under their videos ever. The
[Guest 1]: kind of abuse even if you say something ridiculous and you know, the kind of abuse that comes
[Guest 1]: at you is always gendered. There is sexual abuse involved. There is rape threats involved.
[Guest 1]: You know, there is general minimizing involved, which you don't see going to no matter how
[Guest 1]: outspoken a man. When I started doing and I mean, I remember at the age of 10 when my
[Guest 1]: I saw my brother was taking buses at the age of 10. And he had all these friends and he
[Guest 1]: was going and hanging out with them and they would you know, form these cool gangs and
[Guest 1]: they would go do cool things. And I remember I was dying to turn 10 so that I could take
[Guest 1]: a bus and go meet my school friends and everything and I knew never turned 10 I turned 10 when
[Guest 1]: I was 16 is when my mother finally allowed me to take a bus by myself. And that to then
[Guest 1]: of course, you know, the but don't even put your bag in front, you know, and I mean, you
[Guest 1]: see even today college girls going into trains into buses will have their bags will they
[Guest 1]: have their backpacks in front of them, instead of on their backs, they'll have them in front,
[Guest 1]: because it takes your breasts off the spoking stabbing market for that journey at least.
[Guest 1]: I mean, and for like, I remember I started doing open mics. My mother was genuinely confused.
[Guest 1]: She was like, you're going, you know, into these clubs and stuff like that. First of
[Guest 1]: all, you're not even telling me what clubs these are. And then you come back late in
[Guest 1]: the night. And you know, I think her problem was a little different, where she was like,
[Guest 1]: you're not even drunk. What did you do at this club? If you've come back sober? This
[Unknown]: is terrifying. Did you not go to a club? So much for empowerment. She was sort of like
[Guest 1]: she was terrified. She was like, you know, are you not going to clubs? Oh, God, you're
[Guest 1]: going to somewhere worse. And I was like, no, no, no, clubs only mom, clubs. But I know
[Guest 1]: it took her so much longer to come to terms with the fact that I was doing this and that
[Guest 1]: work required me to be out till say 1230 in the night. Even, you know, when I was sort
[Guest 1]: of when I would say these ridiculous things on stage, that some might find sort of edgy
[Guest 1]: or racy or whatever. I mean, luckily, I feel like as I mentioned earlier, that I've been
[Guest 1]: blessed with super, super open minded parents. I think I am more conservative than my parents.
[Guest 1]: I think I police myself a lot more than they imagine policing me. Because I am like, I'm
[Guest 1]: like now they don't care. They don't say anything. Yeah, I have to be careful. Yeah. Who will
[Guest 1]: marry me? You know, all those thoughts that that sometimes even our parents have not put
[Guest 1]: into us have been ingrained into us by society. That, you know, if you if you speak too much,
[Guest 1]: no man will ever find you attractive. This is my theory. The more a woman talks, the
[Guest 1]: lesser men want to f**k her. And men do not know what to do with a woman they do not want
[Unknown]: to f**k. I have realized that men are like, I don't want to put my dick in her why she's
[Guest 1]: still talking like they get damn confused. And you have to and I think at the age of
[Guest 1]: 32, I can finally say I'm okay with not fitting into any of the stereotypes that you have
[Guest 1]: in your narrative of your story. I don't care if you are like confused by me. Because I
[Guest 1]: am the hero of my own story. And it has taken me 32 years. I can't imagine I mean, I, I
[Guest 1]: hated my 20s. I hated the insecurity of my 20s. I hated how it made me feel. And I my
[Guest 1]: heart goes out to everybody who is navigating this world in their 20s with the level of
[Guest 1]: unsurety with the fact that you are constantly being sort of minimized told that you are
[Guest 1]: a side characters I said in somebody else's story. It just breaks my heart.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said and all of us laugh when you said it just a few moments ago about men
[Amit Varma]: not knowing what to do with women that who are not sexual objects for them. We all laugh
[Amit Varma]: but the fact is that it's not actually a joke. It's actually just true. And earlier you mentioned,
[Amit Varma]: you know, edgy content. And it also strikes me that a lot of content which coming from
[Amit Varma]: a male comedian would not be considered edgy like sexual talk and so on or talk of body
[Amit Varma]: parts and all that is suddenly madly edgy if it's coming from a woman. Yeah. So how
[Amit Varma]: do you deal with that when that realization comes that everything that you say has that
[Amit Varma]: added layer of the context of your gender to it? How does that then affect the world?
[Amit Varma]: Do you try to sort of push the boundaries or do you censor yourself?
[Guest 1]: And for a very long time, so I've been doing comedy for seven, eight years now, I was clinically
[Guest 1]: depressed for two during it, because I was terrified. I did not know what I was doing.
[Guest 1]: And I knew that I didn't know how to do anything else. And I think the depression sort of,
[Guest 1]: I mean, you know, sort of navigating through it, while simultaneously going on stage, of
[Guest 1]: course, because girls got to make a living was...
[Amit Varma]: You got paid in garlic bread, you mentioned in the last episode.
[Guest 1]: What I meant was girls got to make an eating. But I know that I saw my peers travel much
[Guest 1]: faster.
[Amit Varma]: Your male peers.
[Guest 1]: Yes, my male peers travel much faster to a journey that was taking me much longer. Even
[Guest 1]: today the market rewards male comedians because more spaces are male, because the biases against
[Guest 1]: I mean, males, male comedians don't get your laugh is irritating. Your voice is irritating.
[Guest 1]: She is making too many faces. I was like, this is my face. What do I do now? But that
[Guest 1]: you don't see are problems for male comedians. But if you don't fit a certain type of role,
[Guest 1]: when you are like, I mean, and unfortunately, or fortunately, the four or five stereotypes
[Guest 1]: that we have of funny females is either you are grossly obese and disgusting to look at.
[Guest 1]: And therefore your biggest shtick is how like you're just ugly and nobody will want to f**k
[Guest 1]: you. And that is the sort of the even the hero will, you know, you had the tuntuns and
[Guest 1]: the sort of these things where we just accompanied with...
[Guest 1]: There was very little narrative for somebody who was the hero of her own story or the heroine
[Guest 1]: of her own story.
[Guest 1]: And I feel like I struggled with that for a very long time. I was like, what point of
[Guest 1]: view am I writing from? And should I, am I worth, am I valid in saying all these things
[Guest 1]: when I go into an audience? Does my personal story have any value? Because they don't want
[Guest 1]: to hear it. They're a group of, you know, 200 people who've come to laugh. So why should
[Guest 1]: I I mean, if I put myself out there, you know, what will the backlash be like? What will
[Guest 1]: I hear that? And how long can I take that for?
[Amit Varma]: And did you ever then in that case face a conflict between your desire for validation,
[Amit Varma]: which of course, every artist wants, and your desire to also do the kind of work you want
[Guest 1]: to do and be true to yourself, whatever that may mean?
[Guest 1]: And that actually has never stopped. That never stops. That is a continuous process
[Guest 1]: that requires you to continuously engage your ego in this battle of like, I want to do this
[Guest 1]: so badly. I want to tell my story. I want to hear you laugh so badly. But at the same
[Guest 1]: time, I also want to protect myself. And I feel like with comedy, especially there was
[Guest 1]: no precedent. There was nobody in India that was doing it before me. And there were no
[Guest 1]: other women. So it was extremely lonely. And it was, you just sort of had to look within
[Guest 1]: yourself to find...
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, like if eight guys are performing on a given night, and you're the only woman,
[Amit Varma]: you're in a sense like a freak, right? They're looking at you differently.
[Guest 1]: I mean, and even the green rooms and you know, environments, I mean, you I'm sure have been
[Guest 1]: in all male environments. And what is now of course, legendarily known as locker room
[Guest 1]: talk, right? You know, at some point, you're sitting there and you're hearing some men
[Guest 1]: talk about another woman like that. And you're wondering, like you're looking out at the
[Guest 1]: floor and wondering, Oh, what are they saying when I leave the room? And if so, then should
[Guest 1]: I participate? Should I also participate in the abuse of this woman so that they will
[Guest 1]: think I am cool?
[Amit Varma]: One of them.
[Guest 1]: That I am one of the guys.
[Guest 1]: And how do you reconcile that?
[Guest 1]: I am not one of the guys. I am not one of the guys. I have zero interest. Like I've
[Guest 1]: realized dudes are way more drama than girls, by the way. This is what I have learned by
[Guest 1]: interacting with groups of men is that they have way more drama in their lives.
[Amit Varma]: Then what do you say that then being in these environments and you know, overhearing these
[Amit Varma]: conversations and finding out what men are really like, in a sense, as the solution due
[Amit Varma]: to some extent?
[Guest 1]: Extremely, extremely. And the pushback also, that's I'm saying no, like when I started
[Guest 1]: doing comedy, I had nothing about men. I do not care about men from here to Pune. I have
[Guest 1]: zero interest in men. But I constantly got, excuse me, female comedian, you hate men.
[Guest 1]: I'm like, why do you make it so easy then?
[Amit Varma]: And I was watching a YouTube clip of one of your shows and I'd encourage my listeners
[Amit Varma]: to check out all the clips on YouTube, where you were speaking in some show in Australia,
[Amit Varma]: where you said that, you know, I'm, I've been introduced here as a comedian, but in India,
[Amit Varma]: I'm always introduced as a female comedian.
[Guest 1]: And you know, and that was the flip side of the empowerment, right? Is then they mollycoddle
[Guest 1]: you, then they'll be like, you don't want to get raped? Okay, now take these company
[Guest 1]: sanctioned cars. You are not going to save, you're not going to stop rape by wrapping
[Guest 1]: women in bubble wrap. You are going to stop rape by educating rapists to not rape. But
[Guest 1]: that seems to be something that I feel like, like our women's safety budget 100 crores
[Guest 1]: on CCTV cameras. I was like, use that money to just talk to dudes about how women are
[Guest 2]: human beings.
[Guest 2]: And that's the issue, this protection thing that why do women have to, they are the sufferers.
[Guest 2]: They are, you know, fighting their way out.
[Guest 2]: You should be saying we are the sufferers.
[Guest 2]: And then we have to actually protect ourselves. I mean, in our own country where we are born
[Guest 2]: and we are, I mean, we are the part of that productive population, we are contributing
[Guest 2]: to the economy, we are the part of that intellectual section of this society. And we have to protect
[Guest 2]: ourselves and find ways to not get raped and be molested and all those things. Why do we
[Amit Varma]: have to do that?
[Amit Varma]: It's incredibly perverse when you you frame it from the sense that if misogyny is a problem
[Amit Varma]: in India, surely the problem lies with the boys and not the girls. People who have the
[Amit Varma]: attitudes rather than the object of the attitudes. And you mentioned about, you know, women being
[Amit Varma]: a productive part of the workforce. And that's another thing I think that people sort of
[Amit Varma]: just take for granted that, you know, so many men will talk about growing the economy and
[Amit Varma]: this is our GDP growth rate and bang bang. But the point is that you treat half the people
[Amit Varma]: in the country as practically subhuman. And how many women in this country would actually
[Amit Varma]: be in the workforce and be productive? I'm not saying they're not productive if they're
[Amit Varma]: not in the workforce necessarily. But you know what I mean? They'd be far more fulfilled
[Amit Varma]: and contributing much more, but they're not allowed to.
[Guest 1]: You know, this is sort of one of those things where 80% of the problems in this country
[Guest 1]: would really be solved if we tried to solve women's problems. Because obviously, as a
[Guest 1]: gender are people and specially prone to seeing the effects and consequences of bad policies,
[Guest 1]: bad public decision making. They are specially prone to suffering the consequences of that.
[Guest 1]: If you started solving their problems one by one, you would have, like, I bet the number
[Guest 1]: of problems that we could solve and the kind of conclusions that we could come to are much
[Guest 1]: better. I mean, there is that fantastic Angela Saini book called inferior, which talks about
[Guest 1]: how you know, I mean, biologically, it's been said that women are inferior to men physically.
[Guest 1]: And, and then she talks about the biases in data collection, is that we have all known
[Guest 1]: that a pain in your left arm is a sign of a heart attack. Turns out, it's mostly for
[Guest 1]: men. For women, the signs are very different. But we have all been taught that it's a pain
[Guest 1]: in your left arm. There have been people, women who have been having heart attacks and
[Unknown]: not known they're having heart attacks, because there's no pain, because they've been waiting
[Guest 1]: for their left arm to hurt. It is I mean, and I mean, science clearly is not sexist
[Guest 1]: or corruptible. But the people who are practicing said science are just, the samples are male,
[Guest 1]: are just are corruptible and sexist. I mean, not willingly, clearly, but I mean, the sort
[Guest 1]: of the systemic oppression and ignoring of women in the mainstream has just has had,
[Guest 1]: I mean, long term effects that we are going to see for the next six, eight generations.
[Amit Varma]: So now my big question is, are we, you know, now that we've sort of moved well into the
[Amit Varma]: 21st century and the social media and we are exposed to attitudes around the world, are
[Amit Varma]: we changing or not? But I'll come back to that after a quick commercial break.
[Unknown]: So welcome to another week on IVM. If you aren't following us on social media, please
[Unknown]: do where IVM podcasts on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. This week on Simplified in
[Unknown]: the Shorty, Naren and Shrikant simplify the phenomena of near death experiences with interesting
[Unknown]: cases and scientific theories. On Pragati, Pawan and Hamsini are joined by economic policy
[Unknown]: expert Yazaad Jal to discuss negative and positive rights. On the Scene and the Unseen,
[Unknown]: Amit Verma is joined by stand-up comedian Aditi Mittal and our production controller
[Unknown]: Swati to discuss misogyny and popular culture. On Pulyabazi, Saravan Pranai speak to Shruti
[Unknown]: Raj Gopalan about the meaning and importance of property rights in India. This week on
[Unknown]: Shunia One, we have Suchita Salman, founder and CEO of LBP, a local recommendations platform
[Unknown]: striving to discover all things new and old. On Hustle Science, Ranveer and Tejaswant speak
[Unknown]: to their buddy, tech entrepreneur and founder of Hello Inc, Andant Nathkarani to understand
[Unknown]: his coding craze and a lot more about his stories. And now, on to your shows.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the Scene and the Unseen. I'm chatting with Aditi and Swati about the
[Amit Varma]: broad subject of claiming your space, specifically talking about the misogyny in the industries
[Amit Varma]: that they are part of, which is entertainment, journalism and in Indian society in general.
[Amit Varma]: So my question to both of you is that, you know, in terms of technology and access to
[Amit Varma]: the world and so on, India's modernizing really fast, social media, we are, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: Me Too movement was all over the interwebs recently, and so on. And there is a lot more
[Amit Varma]: talk of feminism coming even from men, though one could argue that a lot of it is performative
[Amit Varma]: feminism and it's just, you know, empty virtue signaling without anything really behind it.
[Amit Varma]: Have things been changing in actual concrete terms in the way? Like, is it easier for women
[Amit Varma]: today than they were when you guys entered your respective professions?
[Guest 2]: It's difficult to say that it's easier and how it is happening is to be seen as well.
[Guest 2]: Because if you see urban women like us who have opportunities, if they get educated,
[Guest 2]: if they are alive and they get educated, they have opportunities, definitely, no matter
[Guest 2]: how difficult the way is, but then how they are achieving that has to be seen. You know,
[Guest 2]: every morning when I leave home, there is a cook who comes to cook for me and my husband,
[Guest 2]: which means that my success somewhere is related to her unsuccess.
[Amit Varma]: And the irony is that she is also relatively empowered compared to her peers.
[Guest 2]: Yes, yes. But this success, what we consider as success is actually is half hearted. And
[Guest 2]: I don't think so that it can be seen as a success or achievement because there is a
[Guest 2]: very, very small minuscule section which is being empowered, if at all. What about all
[Guest 2]: those women who are not part of this, this league? Are we not going to think about them?
[Guest 2]: Are we not going to do anything about them?
[Amit Varma]: And you've actually studied film studies. So let me, so the next question might be right
[Amit Varma]: up your street, which is, I know popular culture merely reinforces what society is also like,
[Amit Varma]: but in reinforcing that, you know, it's sort of a vicious cycle that plays out. How much
[Amit Varma]: of a role does popular culture have to play in terms of the role of women in Indian society?
[Amit Varma]: And is that something that has gradually changed? Like, essentially, the reason so many Indian
[Amit Varma]: men end up so entitled and become stalkers of women is because that's what you see in
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood films. That's how you win a woman's heart by teasing her and harassing her till
[Amit Varma]: she eventually gives in. Is that changing? And how much of a role does popular culture
[Guest 2]: play in that?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, definitely. Popular culture itself is a representation of what you see around. If
[Guest 2]: you see the history of various forms of popular culture, say films, if we see how many women
[Guest 2]: have given space in history, like you were saying that we have to claim space and you
[Guest 2]: were mentioning about Tuntun. Do we actually want to know about Tuntun and how many people
[Guest 2]: have written about Tuntun? So that kind of thing that they have been systematically relegated
[Guest 2]: to the margins in every spare.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, here's a tragedy that, you know, I heard Tuntun's name today just now in the
[Amit Varma]: podcast when you brought it up after probably decades. And I remembered at the last time
[Amit Varma]: I heard her name, I would, when I was a kid, I would probably have laughed at the thought
[Amit Varma]: of Tuntun. And one should not laugh at the thought of Tuntun. It's incredibly, you know,
[Guest 1]: and everything that, you know, I mean, you think about
[Guest 1]: someone, but someone as amazing as Shobha Kote, for example, you're like, what a woman,
[Guest 1]: what timing, those scenes that, oh my God, just stellar work. Who's talking about her
[Guest 1]: in comedy? Who is, I mean, even when we went through the history of comedy, there's very
[Guest 1]: little mention of women. There's very little mention of their contributions. And you know,
[Guest 1]: I agree. I mean, I agree and disagree to a certain extent that because I feel like whenever
[Guest 1]: Bollywood film, then we're like, wow, wow, look, Bollywood is affecting society change.
[Guest 1]: But then when bad things happen, you're like, well, it's just art. So there has to be a
[Guest 1]: level of somewhere where responsibilities are taken on both ends, right? By the filmmakers
[Guest 1]: to realize that, okay, we are living in a world where, you know, violence against women
[Guest 1]: is at its peak or is being reported at its peak. And it's something that everybody is
[Guest 1]: talking about and needs to be addressed. So I maybe will not make a rape revenge fantasy
[Guest 1]: film for a man, maybe, you know what I'm saying? As a filmmaker, maybe you decide to take that
[Amit Varma]: responsibility. There was a horrible film which came out last year where Hrithik Roshan
[Amit Varma]: played a blind guy, one of a blind couple and his wife gets raped. And the second time
[Amit Varma]: she gets raped, she kills herself. And she does it for the reason that she doesn't want
[Amit Varma]: to cause him any more pain because every time she is raped, he is getting caused pain. And
[Amit Varma]: that is just mind blowing. This is a film which came out last year. How can those people
[Guest 1]: even agree to act in those movies? And so there has to be there has to I mean, there
[Guest 1]: has to be a responsibility taken in both directions. And I mean, truly the we cannot there's that
[Guest 1]: whole chicken and egg situation where you're like, oh, does the phenomena come first or
[Guest 1]: the this thing? These are two inextricably tied in to each other. And you attack them
[Guest 1]: where you can. Yes, exactly. Exactly. It's because and I you know what, this is one thing
[Guest 1]: that I find very amazing is when people are like you comedians, y'all are attacking that
[Guest 1]: movie. I was like, I eat my dinner for lunch the next day. I have worn my pajamas for five
[Guest 1]: days in a row. You know what I'm saying? That's my level of power. So me saying something
[Guest 1]: stupid to some dumb movie, which is a 60 crore project with 40 crores in this thing you're
[Unknown]: telling me my stupid to have pajamas Salman Khan doesn't even have a shirt. Shame on you,
[Guest 1]: you privileged person. But you know, we we have stopped acknowledging the unevenness
[Guest 1]: of power. That sort of popular culture because I don't know when popular culture became the
[Guest 1]: victim. I don't know when Bollywood became the thing to be protected. I don't know when
[Guest 1]: the other day also some that Airtel thing happened where some girl right, you know,
[Unknown]: said some nonsense. Somebody was like, I feel bad for Airtel. I said once you feel bad.
[Unknown]: I feel bad for Airtel. What? This is a corporate with money with PR with what? And also no
[Unknown]: matter what has been done to a company should never feel bad for a company. Definitely never
[Unknown]: ever for a company. That's that's sort of that's my heart beats for relying on Adani
[Guest 1]: cop must be lying awake in bed. Poor Adani cop. You know that that sort of like treating
[Guest 1]: pop culture as if it's equal to the people who are consuming it is very dangerous. Right?
[Amit Varma]: And it's a vicious circle they feed on each other. Yes, and everything is interrelated.
[Amit Varma]: But you attack them when you can. If you see something wrong, you call it out. Yes. That
[Amit Varma]: doesn't mean you have to call everything that is wrong out. I'm just preempting the inevitable
[Amit Varma]: what about the Airtel ka naam liya, Hatch ne bhi wo kya, uska naam kyu nahi liya. So
[Amit Varma]: before we started recording this Swati, you were talking about journalism and how it is
[Amit Varma]: such still today such a misogynistic profession and you said something that intrigued me.
[Amit Varma]: You said that even the women who have risen to the top of the profession have turned themselves
[Guest 2]: into men. I'm going to ask you to elaborate on that. Yes. I think my experience I'm talking
[Guest 2]: only from my experience and I can't talk for others. But my experience has been like that.
[Guest 2]: Because I think that's the way for women to reach to the top. I definitely know that it's
[Guest 2]: much harder for them than their male colleagues. But then in that, you know, fight, when they
[Guest 2]: become like their male colleagues is something that they're not conscious about.
[Amit Varma]: When you say that's a way for them to reach to the top, you mean play the patriarchal
[Guest 2]: game, do the whining? Yeah, I mean, because there is a lot of fight going on internally
[Guest 2]: and externally, you know, when you're trying to achieve something within a space that has
[Guest 2]: its set rule, because you cannot change the organizational rule. So you somehow now device
[Guest 2]: ways of dealing with it. And the people that you're dealing with are not easy. Then what
[Guest 2]: happens is your own tools and equipments that you have to fight it out do not feel sufficient,
[Guest 2]: you have to learn something, do something undo something. And that process actually
[Guest 2]: changes you before you even realize it that it has, you know, has had an impact on you
[Guest 2]: in a way that you're not recognizing it, but you are completely changed by the time you
[Guest 2]: pass through that entire tunnel and you reach to the target where you wanted to, you are
[Amit Varma]: a completely changed person. So if I can just paraphrase that to make sure I'm understanding
[Amit Varma]: it correctly, what you mean is that, let's say that you're a journalist, and you have
[Amit Varma]: great journalistic skills, whatever they are, but that's not all you need to get ahead.
[Amit Varma]: You also have to play that corporate game of getting ahead in the organization according
[Amit Varma]: to certain rules, whether they are certain rules of socializing or certain modes of behavior
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And if you choose to play that game to get ahead in the profession,
[Amit Varma]: then that will inevitably change you as a person in the process. And you will become
[Amit Varma]: a part of that game, which is what you mean by the women who reach the top turning into
[Guest 2]: men. Yeah, because you are trying to fit in somewhere and it has its own, you know, set
[Guest 2]: of rules to and consequences to confirm, I mean, rules to confirm to and consequences
[Guest 2]: that will follow. You know that this is the only way. And that is how you decide that
[Guest 2]: whether I want this or I don't want this, like I made a decision that I don't want this.
[Guest 2]: So I did not have, you know, have to walk that particular road. And I made my alternative
[Guest 2]: to you know, reach somewhere where I want to see myself. So everybody is not able to
[Guest 2]: make that. Yes. In a way, I find myself privileged and I'm in complete harmony with myself, no
[Guest 2]: matter what others think about it. You know, in a workspace, when you are not able to follow
[Guest 2]: the rules, you are seen as somebody who is cynical, who is not making enough effort to
[Guest 2]: do something. I have heard from my bosses that, you know, you're very pessimistic and
[Guest 2]: you're a cynical person because you're not there are so many opportunities, you're not
[Guest 2]: trying to grab them. Because I saw people grabbing those opportunities and the ways
[Guest 2]: it through which you know, those opportunities can be grabbed. And I'm somebody who decided
[Guest 2]: that okay, I don't want to be that successful. What success actually means in those terms.
[Guest 2]: So it's okay for me that if I'm not successful, that's the way I am. But people who have actually
[Guest 2]: achieved it would not admit that, that they have done that. But they would say that these
[Guest 2]: are the ways to achieve success, because you can't do much about it. It's a constitutional
[Guest 2]: thing. Like there is a constitution which has already been set. It's not being said
[Guest 2]: by women, but they have to follow that it's the rule of law, and you live by the rule
[Amit Varma]: of law.
[Amit Varma]: In all fairness, I'll just say that, you know, I write for a number of publications and all
[Amit Varma]: my editors at this current point in time are women and they have reached the top of the
[Amit Varma]: professions and they're very strong women and I respect them a lot. But I can't speak
[Guest 1]: on their behalf. You know, you're sharing your experience. So,
[Guest 1]: You know, and that's what it is, is that, I mean, because often this, the conversations
[Guest 1]: around patriarchy and misogyny ends up becoming a men versus women thing, which it is not.
[Guest 1]: Women can be misogynistic as well. And I can say safely that, you know, before I sort of
[Guest 1]: got introduced to so many feminist women and feminist thought, I was also a misogynist.
[Guest 1]: I was in charge of my own oppression. I internalized my own misogyny to hate myself enough because
[Guest 1]: I knew that that was what everybody else was doing. And so, you know, when I meet women
[Guest 1]: who are misogynistic, it doesn't surprise me. It just breaks my heart a little bit that
[Guest 1]: like, you know, this is sort of, I wish I could tell you that this is about, you know,
[Guest 1]: it could free both of us if we stopped thinking like this, but that's not my place.
[Guest 1]: They made the choices. Exactly. And I cannot be the judge of how
[Guest 1]: they got to making those choices. Yes, if you know, if they are in turn hampering my
[Guest 1]: growth, I can be mad. But that's at the max I can be is mad because it just, I understand
[Guest 1]: that the systems that are oppressing me are the same systems that are oppressing them.
[Guest 1]: And with women, I just feel like the conversations you can have are very different. Whereas with
[Guest 1]: men, I have seen an active resistance to understanding. And I mean this in the most like the most
[Guest 1]: well-meaning men will turn around and be like, what you're saying women are discriminated
[Guest 1]: against. That's crazy. I'm like, you're kidding. You're kidding. I have done. I mean, I have
[Guest 1]: to say this. I don't do interviews anymore because it's been a year and a half since
[Guest 1]: I've done an interview. And I just stopped doing them because I was getting calls from
[Guest 1]: female journalists, of course, who would call me and say that the you know, we want to talk
[Guest 1]: to you about comedy, and then it would just go into but tell us about sexism. And I was
[Guest 1]: like, but I have brilliant thoughts about comedy as well. But to them, they're like,
[Guest 1]: we're doing you a favor by showcasing you. Yeah, if you wanted to talk about comedy,
[Guest 1]: we'd call the XYZ. We'd call the men, but we are calling you so now avratas. And so
[Guest 1]: then you have to avrat them. And so beyond the point, and also I mean, like, to be honest,
[Guest 1]: you meet sort of interviewers who are so deeply dismissive of the work that you do. I have
[Guest 1]: had to educate all my interview, whenever I get called for an interview, I'm like, have
[Guest 1]: you seen a show? Do you want I'll send you a video so you watch it. So you know what
[Guest 1]: you're talking about when I give you my free time to come and tell you about my work.
[Amit Varma]: At this point, Swati, I must confess that when I invited Aditi on the show, I proposed
[Amit Varma]: two ideas. I said one, we can talk about the history of stand up comedy in India, especially
[Amit Varma]: and two, we can talk about misogyny in entertainment. So it's like talking about me.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, you know, again, don't be defensive. Yeah, exactly. And no, and the and you know,
[Amit Varma]: going on that don't be defensive point. It is also true that whenever you mention misogyny
[Amit Varma]: to a man, the man will take it as if it is a personal slur and get defensive. And that,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense is also an admission of guilt in a manner of speaking. Yes. Yeah. And I mean,
[Guest 1]: you know, the thing is, I like we are all misogynist. We have all been misogynist at
[Amit Varma]: some point in time or the other. And misogyny is just one level of f***ed upness. We are
[Amit Varma]: all humans are f***ed up in various different human ways. And it's fine. If you work on
[Amit Varma]: that and acknowledge that like, when I look back on myself as you know, 15 years ago,
[Amit Varma]: I wasn't just misogynist. I was a lot else which is you know, you work past that. Yeah.
[Guest 1]: And and I think we especially with the elite women's right now. We are angry. We're angry.
[Guest 1]: Women are who are realizing their rights. And the way they have been discriminated against
[Guest 1]: are angry. And I feel like that anger also intimidates people and they will tell you
[Guest 1]: tone down your anger, be nicer, be more palatable. How much how many waves of feminism will come
[Guest 1]: and go before you will realize that this anger is justified, that this is costing us time,
[Guest 1]: costing us money, costing us emotions, costing us energy, costing us careers, costing us,
[Guest 1]: you know, families, how much longer and how much more politely would you like someone
[Amit Varma]: to say, please stop f***ing XYZ over? So what do you answer then be to the question I'd
[Amit Varma]: earlier asked and Swati had taken on that are things getting better within this age
[Guest 1]: of social media and so on? In fact, I think, no, you know, I don't know if they're getting
[Guest 1]: better as an absolute whole. The fields where it can be messed up is even more like, like
[Guest 1]: now the the what used to be these conversations in public spaces like on the roads, where
[Guest 1]: you're walking down the road and you get cat called and then you suddenly cover yourself
[Guest 1]: up with your dupatta and you walk a little smaller. Those conversations are being taken
[Guest 1]: online. Yeah. So now you are sitting at a Twitter account where you've just wanted to
[Guest 1]: say I ate an apple and then suddenly you've got 300 you know abuses under that and so
[Guest 1]: you realize well I'm not going to come back to this site. I'm not going to say so how
[Guest 1]: do you deal with that you don't read the comments? I personally you know again it took me time
[Guest 1]: it took me time and it requires a lot of sort of it requires a lot of mental energy and
[Guest 1]: it costs you a lot where you see your male peers shooting off at the mouth and you know
[Guest 1]: getting ahead in life and whatever it is that they're doing. Whereas you are sort of like
[Amit Varma]: no no no I don't know I should cut my back back in front of you you're wearing a backpack
[Guest 1]: in front of you very essentially and it takes time it takes time but I I know for a fact
[Guest 1]: that this is a thing and that the battle as we explore new fields is not going to become
[Guest 1]: absolutely better. The battle will take different shapes and forms of just being able to protect
[Guest 2]: yourself and being able to be free at the same time. And I think we really need to question
[Guest 2]: women's role also because it's very important to recognize that who is actually playing
[Guest 2]: an important role in carrying this kind of tradition forward. It's not only men because
[Guest 2]: it can't happen like that. It's it's definitely males and females both and we have to realize
[Amit Varma]: it and at some point address it. Wasn't it Kareena Kapoor who recently dismissively said
[Guest 2]: oh but I'm not a feminist. But I'm not I would not say that I'm a feminist. Yeah well well
[Amit Varma]: I mean I mean my position there really is that every decent person male or female should
[Guest 1]: be a feminist should be a feminist. Yeah you know being human. You know but this is another
[Guest 1]: thing. Why is the labor of claiming feminism on Kareena Kapoor. Why does nobody go to Shakti
[Guest 1]: Kapoor and say Bhai tumne toh bahut rape scene ki hai. Tell us are you a feminist. Nobody
[Guest 1]: asks him that. So again the the labor of even I've realized that I think the media focuses
[Amit Varma]: on that because it's more newsworthy if Kareena says she's not a feminist and Shakti Kapoor
[Guest 1]: says she's not a feminist. Shakti Kapoor is the one that has you know caused the problems
[Guest 2]: now. But Shakti Kapoor is not that popular also. I think that could be one of the reasons
[Guest 1]: that when Kareena Kapoor says something so we'll listen to her. Make a big deal out of
[Guest 1]: it. That's what I'm saying. If you are a woman journalist realize that the things that you're
[Guest 1]: doing and you know this sort of this pinning the blame and even asking women to take the
[Guest 1]: mantle of fixing things. I've noticed that with this immigration crisis that's happening
[Guest 1]: right now. 90% of the female comics on my Twitter timeline are doing charity shows.
[Guest 1]: Charity shows to send money to these kids that are in these detention centers right
[Guest 1]: now. Not any male comics. And it is because just women are putting themselves out there
[Guest 1]: more taking on the labor of fixing the problems that they see. And to me you know I agree
[Guest 1]: with you that we have to as a society address patriarchy and the problems that misogyny
[Guest 1]: is causing and the economic loss that amount that misogyny is costing us in sort of income
[Guest 1]: is crazy. But we also have to look at the role of men. And the fact is that you have
[Guest 1]: to sort of realize that this problem is not only because it's a woman's problem. It's
[Guest 1]: only for women. This is a problem that both genders need to sit down and address. And
[Guest 1]: very rarely is the other drawbacks of patriarchy on men discussed. So let's say there's a male
[Guest 1]: listener of my show and hopefully there are male listeners of my show. I figured by now
[Guest 1]: all the men have tuned out. All the men are like these bitches. No, I really doubt it.
[Amit Varma]: Every man who hasn't tuned out kindly leave a Twitter message in support of these ladies
[Unknown]: and please tag them on it. Please. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
[Amit Varma]: no, no, no, no, no, no. Good men should also speak up once in a while so here's kind of
[Amit Varma]: my final question to you, you've painted a really dismal picture and so on. And assuming
[Amit Varma]: that there are male listeners of this show of any age who agree with the fact that this
[Amit Varma]: picture is really dismal, but whose responses to say that, look, I know that I am a nice
[Amit Varma]: guy in my personal life. It's a fact. My sympathies are with you, but I don't do any of these
[Amit Varma]: things. I'm a good person. But that's not the whole story. What would you want to say
[Guest 1]: to them? First, I would say stop getting defensive when somebody says there's a problem. Right.
[Guest 1]: Because, because every time I like you just say man, dudes are like this, there'll be 600 dudes.
[Amit Varma]: What if they don't get defensive and they just shrug their shoulder and say not my problem.
[Guest 1]: And that's also fine. Actually, that would be preferable to you being like, excuse me,
[Guest 1]: not all men. So one is don't get defensive. Two, talk to other men. I think right now the biggest
[Guest 1]: education needs to be given from one man to another one because men will only listen to each
[Guest 1]: other. Two, also because there is the fact is that men need to start discussing how patriarchy
[Guest 1]: is affecting them. They need to start discussing how emotionally stunted men have become because
[Guest 1]: of the fact that they are not allowed to express their emotions. They need to discuss what is the
[Guest 1]: crazy suicide rates among men of the age of 15 to what is it 45. What is causing that? They need to
[Guest 1]: discuss what is causing that. I don't know. You tell me. It's, it's, it's a, it's a male problem.
[Guest 1]: It's a young men are committing suicide in larger numbers than any other subgroup.
[Amit Varma]: Toxic feminism. I'm kidding. Don't look at me like that. I'm not even looking at you.
[Guest 1]: Men need to start discussing with each other. And this is one thing. I mean, if you see a creep,
[Guest 1]: if you see a fellow friend who's a creep, address it immediately. Because when your
[Guest 1]: creepy friend gets called out, then it's going to be much more difficult for you to be like,
[Guest 1]: well, actually, I thought he was just a friend, but he's a creep. It's much better to quickly
[Guest 1]: tell your friend, listen, brother, you're being a creep. Don't be a creep. Don't be a creep,
[Guest 1]: right? It is much easier. It will save you and the entire ecosystem of brotherhood that you
[Guest 1]: are supporting a lot of trouble. If you start calling each other out. One that, so that's three,
[Guest 1]: four, don't interrupt women. Five, listen to what they're saying. Start with these five and,
[Guest 1]: and believe them, believe them because you realize that women think a lot before speaking up.
[Guest 1]: They think a lot before speaking up. And so, and therefore the words carry more weight.
[Guest 1]: They're, they're, they're worth, especially if they're speaking directly to you,
[Guest 1]: understand that a woman who is speaking directly to you is taking some time out.
[Guest 1]: If she's explaining stuff to you, she is taking some time out. So appreciate that. Also,
[Guest 1]: this one, it's a final one is that when two women are talking or when women are talking to an
[Guest 1]: audience, don't interrupt them. Save all your feminism for your fellow men. It'll help.
[Guest 2]: That's an amazing point. Swati. I think I would say two things only. One is a sensitization. We
[Amit Varma]: really need to sensitize men and at various levels. And you'd say that like Aditi said,
[Amit Varma]: the responsibility of that is also on the men themselves. Men themselves. That was my second
[Guest 2]: point. So the first point is to sensitize them at every level. I mean, right from home to school to
[Guest 2]: the organization that they go to work. That's very, very important. Otherwise they never realize
[Guest 2]: what they're actually doing. If they're not sensitive enough to what they're doing, their
[Guest 2]: words, their actions, their postures, gestures, you have no idea how gestures, postures, and,
[Guest 2]: you know, those smirks actually, you know, psychologically affect you when two men are
[Guest 2]: doing that and you know, okay, I'm not part of that. So there is something which is going on.
[Guest 2]: It might be against me, might not be against me, but you are actually focusing on that,
[Guest 2]: which takes your energy, which is your creative energy. If you are creative or if you are in the
[Guest 2]: field where you are supposed to do something. So that's one thing that they need to be sensitized
[Guest 2]: that women are normal human beings. They are human beings like you. They feel,
[Unknown]: if you precast, you will not bleed.
[Guest 2]: And second thing is, I think we need a men's movement for women, because this is not going
[Guest 2]: to happen, you know, in isolation that women, okay, everywhere at every platform, like she said
[Guest 2]: that Kareena Kapoor herself is not responsible for, you know, saying that, okay, I'm a feminist,
[Guest 2]: okay, she opts out of it, then what? And I'm not sure that it can happen in such a diverse and,
[Guest 2]: you know, huge country, which is so divided on various lines, but that is a solution to this
[Amit Varma]: problem from micro level to macro level. And at some level, it's also a call for self-awareness,
[Amit Varma]: because men instead of getting defensive and saying, oh, they are saying that men are bad,
[Amit Varma]: are actually saying that many men are just clueless. And if they were a little more
[Amit Varma]: clued into what they are doing, and you know, the world would be a better place.
[Guest 1]: Yeah. And also last one, if you ever have any thoughts about like, oh, what should I do in
[Guest 1]: this case? Is this sexist? You know, what would a woman think? Ask a woman.
[Amit Varma]: Boom. On that excellent note, we shall end this episode. Aditi and Swati,
[Amit Varma]: thank you so much. I learned a lot talking to you guys today.
[Guest 2]: Thank you so much for having us.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do check out the last episode, which I did with
[Amit Varma]: Aditi on the history of comedy in general and stand up comedy in India. And you can follow her
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter at or I Aditi A W R Y A D I T I. You can follow Swati at Swati Bakshi 02. You can follow
[Amit Varma]: me at Amit Verma, A M I T V A R M A. And for past episodes of the seen and the unseen, do head on
[Unknown]: over to seen unseen.in. Goodbye for now. There she stands, a podcast addict. Outside the bank,
[Unknown]: having traveled several miles to get in with other poor souls like her. The journey, though daunting
[Unknown]: for this youngling, will have some comfort because she has downloaded her favorite podcast.
[Unknown]: You can see more of her species on IVM podcasts.com, your one stop destination
[Unknown]: where you can check out the coolest Indian podcasts. Happy listening.